<1>Overview</1>
Even during a time of war, the Autarch watches your fledgling society with a keen eye toward teaching you a painful lesson.  It was years ago that you gathered the people up from under her nose, and traveled beyond the dark mountains toward the east, looking to start a new life.  Yet old grudges die hard, and catching the cloaked Freeguilder within your village confirmed your worst fears; when the war is over, the Autarch will begin the struggle against you in earnest.
And there is no longer any question of <i>if</i> the Autarch will conquer the Plainsmen.  It is only a question of when.  Perhaps a few years yet before the threats will begin, before her thirst for expansion brings her beyond the mountains toward your Stronghold, but no more than that.  You have a dearth of time to prepare for the Autarch’s wrath.  Will you use that time to build up a military force to stop her?  Use diplomacy and convince the scattered factions around you to unite for a common cause?  Or will you ignore the great risks, and harness the power of the arcane arts?  What will you sacrifice for independence?

<2>The Campaign</2>
Wrath of the Autarch (WotA) is a kingdom building roleplaying game built upon the FATE game engine, as popularized by games like Spirit of the Century, Dresden Files, Legends of Anglerre, Diaspora, and most recently codified in the Fate Core rules.  The roleplaying part of the game involves friends getting together and telling stories about a fantastical realm.  The central character of these stories is the Stronghold, a society of people struggling to survive in the shadow of a malevolent power.  The Stronghold will hopefully grow over many seasons into a powerful force which may be able to withstand the onslaught of the Autarch, a despotic ruler of a large but stagnant empire.  
More than just telling stories, though, WotA is also a game.  The players strategize and plan the best course of action to thwart the Autarch.  WotA is played over a series of sessions, each of which takes roughly three or so hours of time.  These sessions form a campaign, which will end when the Stronghold has either thwarted the tyranny of the Autarch, or succumbed to her wrath.  
During a session, the players take on the roles of characters trying to accomplish a mission for the greater glory of the Stronghold.  One player, the GameMaster (GM), takes on the role of all the obstacles and adversaries, including the task of planning the Autarch’s actions.  
Missions could involve exploring strange new regions to find resources, engaging in diplomacy with other factions for purposes of trade and friendship, or even clashing with the forces of the Autarch on the field of battle.  Only one mission may be attempted for each season of the narrative, so it is important to prioritize which missions are the most pressing.
Unlike most tabletop roleplaying games, players do not play the role of only one character for the duration of the campaign.  Before the first game, a pool of ten characters, called heroes, are created.  Alternatively, the heroes provided in the back of the book may be used, or some combination of both.  Before a session of play, each player chooses to take on the role of any character from this pool, based on the hero’s suitability for the mission at hand.  For instance, if the mission involves killing an ogre that is stealing cattle, choosing characters more suitable for combat or tracking would be wise.  Managing these heroes is an important part of the game, as they are not easily replaced if something unfortunate occurs.  If enough heroes are killed or taken out of action for lengthy periods of time, it may become difficult to successfully complete missions and hold off the Autarch.
Although the heroes can gain skill and evolve during a mission, of equal importance is the effect each mission has on the Stronghold.  The impact a mission will have on the Stronghold is known before it is attempted, both the rewards for success and the penalties for failure.  Ultimately, there are only so many significant efforts which can be accomplished during a year, and each mission will need to be prioritized between the immediate needs of the Stronghold and the player’s long term strategic vision.

<2>Characters</2>
Characters in WotA are described by five primary facets; aspects, skills, stunts, stress, and relationships.  Aspects are arguably the most important part of a FATE game.  These are short descriptive phrases which give both color and mechanical weight to characters, factions, or scenes.  For instance, Towering Swordsmith and Quick to Anger could be aspects associated with a character.  Aspects are described in more detail in the FATE chapter, and in even greater detail in the Fate Core rules.  
Skills are areas of expertise which help flesh out what a character is good at.  Stunts are associated with skills and are abilities that go above and beyond what the common person is capable of.  Finally, relationships are just that, relationships with significant people in the game.  These are represented as aspects, which function the same as other aspects in the game, although there are certain restrictions on how many relationships on character may have. Magical sorceries may also be affected by relationships.  
Another important part of a character is stress, which reflects different forms of hardships the character is experiencing.  There are two main stress tracks, mental and physical.  Mental stress could range from psychological trauma to lack of dedication for the mission at hand.  Physical stress tends to represent exhaustion and strain.  There are consequences (represented as aspects) associated with these stress tracks.  While stress is perhaps transient, consequences could be longer lasting: more harmful psychological issues or raw physical trauma.  The FATE chapter covers this in more detail. 

<2>The Stronghold</2>
The Stronghold is the central character in the game.  The term Stronghold is used as a generic way to refer to the society which all of the heroes will inhabit (the players will come up with a specific name for their Stronghold).  During the initial session of the game, more details about the Stronghold will be fleshed out.  Why was the Stronghold founded?  What sort of grudge exists between the Autarch and the Stronghold?
The Stronghold, similarly to characters, has a few attributes that are tracked throughout the campaign.  Unlike the many skills characters have, there are only a few attributes for the Stronghold: stability and population.  Stability describes the overall health of the Stronghold.  If stability decreases too far, the Stronghold will collapse and the players will fail to stop the Autarch.  Population is an abstract value measuring the number of people living under the Stronghold’s banner.
Besides stability and population, the Stronghold is described by developments and regions.  Developments are similar to stunts, although they affect all the heroes in the Stronghold.  For instance, a mage tower provides all the heroes access to certain powerful magics.  Regions are large areas of land, which provide resources with which to trade or build developments.  Finally, dispositions are tracked between the Stronghold and the other factions in the game, which represent a level of allegiance with the other factions in the game.

<2>The Realm</2>
The setting for Wrath of the Autarch takes place in a medieval fantasy world known as the Realm.  At the start of the campaign, there are a few facts about the Realm which are known.  Everything else will be constructed by the players.  
This section outlines the setting upon which the rules have been built around.  Although many details have been purposefully left open to allow for creative input during play, the rules are constructed around certain necessary thematic elements important in a fantasy kingdom building role-playing game.

<2>Geography</2>
The geography of the Realm is purposefully left vague.  Lands are parceled up into regions, which are at least hundreds of square miles in size.  The exact location of regions is ignored.  For instance, the regions that the Stronghold controls may not even be contiguous, but rather may be in remote areas, similar to a colony.  If the group enjoys making maps, a map detailing where these regions are located can be created, but it is not required.  Regions are abstractions which generate resources that may be gained or lost by the Stronghold.  These resources are ore, timber, mana, food, and luxuries.

<2>The Autarch</2>
Perhaps not surprisingly, the Autarch is an important figure in the game.  She is a sorcerer of great power and an incredibly shrewd leader.  The Autarch rules over a sprawling empire, known as the Independent Free Guilds, whose populace are sometimes referred to as FreeGuilders.  For some reason, decided by the players at the start of the campaign, the Autarch’s empire is expanding out and will eventually look to claim the lands on which the Stronghold has settled.  Initially, the Autarch is fighting a battle against a primitive but numerous people known as the Plainsmen, which provides the Stronghold a few years to build up before the Autarch can attack in earnest.
Although the Autarch is a powerful mage, the FreeGuilders don’t heavily rely on magic.  This is partly due to the lack of mana from the land.  Instead, they rely on a strong military presence to achieve their goals.  Whether the FreeGuilders are interested in acquiring more mana or not can be decided during play.

<2>Magic</2>
Magic is a primeval force which links the land and the people together.  The raw substrate is referred to as mana, and is harnessed by channelers, people and creatures trained in both detecting and harnessing it.  Mana is present everywhere, but in some regions, old and mysterious places in the Realm, it exists in a high enough concentration that it can be used to create powerful effects.  This is a slow process, as it can take multiple seasons to completely harness the mana from a region.
If a very powerful release of mana occurs, backlash is possible.  This backlash can take many forms, depending on the nature of the arcane secret used to release the magic.  The land from which the mana came from could become blighted, taking on a twisted form related to the nature of the magical effect which released the mana.  For instance, if a channeler uses mana to create a great storm of fire which destroys an army of men, the region from which the mana was drawn may become a hellish burning landscape, with permanently smoldering flora.  A blighted land quickly becomes unusable, the resources on it unable to be used or harvested.
The backlash from some secrets can cause physical and psychological torment to the channeler’s loved ones.  This can manifest in minor ways, such as quirks and phobias which are bizarre but not debilitating.  At the extreme ends, however, the affected may become completely transformed by the mana, no longer in control of their actions and taking on the physical form of the energies which caused the transformation.  These creatures are known as the fates, and are generally killed when found.  It is a risky proposition getting too close to a channeler who abuses their power, and channelers are frequently solitary people.
Mana is affected in subtle ways by emotional fluctuations from the inhabitants of the Realm, and trained channelers can see these whirls and eddies of mana to detect strong emotions coming from those they interact with.  They may also be able to detect what lands someone hails from, since mana has a unique signature from the region in which someone lives.

<2>Factions</2>
Besides the Stronghold, there are a number of other factions which inhabit the Realm.  These factions have the same attributes (stability and population), developments, and regions which define the Stronghold.  In addition, each faction has a trade chart which lists various imports and exports for each faction.  Trade relations with other factions may form an important part of the long term strategy of the Stronghold.
The factions are described in greater detail in the Factions section.  The relationships that are developed between the Stronghold and the factions are an important part of the campaign.  A brief sketch of each faction is provided here, including what they commonly trade for.  The actual trade charts are found in the various chapters for each faction.

<3>Burgan Vale</3>
The lands of Burgan Vale are ripe with mana, and the inhabitants of this vale have gone to great lengths to protect this vital resource.  Some of the greatest channelers in the Realm are from Burgan Vale.  The people of the Vale try to live in a balance with the land, taking only what they need.  They hold festivals and ceremonies for The Veil, what they refer to as the relationship between the people and the magic which binds them.  One large ceremony, the Festival of Illusions, takes place over the summer, and is a breathtaking display of their tight bond with the mana.
Exports: Mana, Arcane Developments
Imports: Ore
Crescent Hold
Crescent Hold is built amongst the sheer rock faces of the Crescent Mountains, well protected from invasion by a number of technological wonders.  The people of Crescent Hold have extensive networks of mines built throughout the mountains and valleys in the area.  They value science and technology, using networks of devices to aid in the removal of precious minerals.
Exports: Ore, Technology Developments
Imports: Timber
Gravewood
The Gravewood is a great expanse of forests, connected by beautiful forests and streams.  The people of Gravewood are solitary people, tightly bonded to each other, but not very trusting of the other peoples in the Realm.  Instead, they tend to be fierce survivalists, highly skilled in using meager supplies to great effect.  The promise of hard to find materials, such as rare spices or minerals, tends to open them up quickest.  The region gets its name due to the menagerie of terrifying predators in the area, as well as the traps and deterrents the locals have placed there.
Exports: Timber, Minor Developments
Imports: Luxuries
Lily Manor
The reach and influence of Lily Manor extends further than any faction in the Realm.  They are diplomats and traders of the first order, exchanging obscure objects of art and wealth.  Lily Manor aggressively works to deeply understand the other societies around them.  Frequently this knowledge is sensitive in nature, and trading partners may find themselves the victims of subtle extortions.
Exports: Luxuries, Diplomacy Developments
Imports: Food  
The Sunriders
Might and military prowess are the primary focus of the Sunriders, a numerous people well versed in martial combat and archery.  Their territories extend over a large area, a verdant land excellent for cultivating crops and livestock.  Horses are important to the Sunriders, and they are expert riders of the towering golden destriers that are common in the area.  These horses are used to cover the great distances between their settlements and become a menacing sight during war.
Exports: Food, Military Developments
Imports: Mana
Missions
There are seven types of missions in WotA. Each type of mission has different repercussions on the Stronghold and possibly other factions in the Realm.  The mission types are:
Exploration: The heroes adventure to newly discovered regions, trying to conquer them to gain much needed resources.  Conquering the regions may involve fighting off beasts or negotiating with native peoples.  There are ten unclaimed regions at the start of the campaign, and they are discovered slowly as the campaign progresses.
Trade: Trade allows for developing trade agreements with another faction.  This is an important part of the strategy in WotA, covering your weaknesses by forming favorable alliances with other factions in the Realm.
Conquest: The clash of armies.  Frequently this will occur against the forces of the Autarch, although it is possible to use Military missions to thwart other factions and plunder their resources.
Espionage:
Sabotage: Covert missions to steal technologies and goods, allowing the improvement of Stronghold developments in a rapid fashion.   Also includes sabotaging a faction’s developments, hobbling their effectiveness.  Such missions are always risky, although the penalty for getting caught varies depending on the faction as well as the intent of the mission. It is one thing to steal secrets, quite another to wreak havoc and destruction.
Assassination: Murdering an important leader from a faction.  Can help to destabilize the faction, as well as possibly make other missions easier by removing a key obstacle.
Quest: Quests are expeditions to retrieve powerful relics and artifacts.  These are frequently very difficult missions, but the rewards can be substantial.  Rumors of these artifacts must first be found, however, frequently through diplomacy with other factions, although there are other means. 
Threat: Threats are the only mission type which isn’t directed and chosen by the players.  Instead, Threats are determined either by chance (for threats occurring in regions or with factions) or by the GM (for threats from the Autarch, which grow in difficulty over time).

<2>Mission Structure</2>
Missions are composed of two distinct modes of play, a narrative phase and a tactical phase.  During the narrative phase, the players are confronted by tasks and hardships referred to as obstacles which potentially add to their stress.  It is also a time for players to use certain stunts and skills proactively, in order to give the heroes advantages later on in the mission.  The narrative phase is fast moving, using only a few mechanics, and relies on the creativity of the players to add to the story.
After the narrative phase comes the tactical phase, which consists of a mini-game, a set of tactical rules designed around a specific activity.  The mini-game chosen for the tactical phase depends on the current mission.  Where the narrative obstacles are very simple and open for any situation, the mini-games provide a tactical framework that allows for more strategy during play.  The mini-games are:
Diplomacy: Rules for persuading influential members of other factions to agree to a deal with the Stronghold. 
Infiltration: Conducting activities, such as espionage or sabotage, without being detected.
Skirmish: Tactical combat involving the heroes and small numbers of opponents.
Warfare: Combat involving the military units of the Stronghold opposed by other factions.
Overview

<2>How to Proceed</2>
It is neither necessary, nor even wise, to read the entire book before playing.  The most important pieces of information are placed in the first few chapters.  The FATE and Missions chapters are the most important in terms of key rules.  Everything is built from these concepts.  The Getting Started chapter includes information on the first session and how to start playing.  Read these three chapters before attempting play.  The rest of the book should be read as needed over the course of the campaign.

<2>Designer’s Notes</2>
Since this is a pre-beta version of the rules, some chapters end with designer’s notes.  These notes may eventually be incorporated into the final rules in some fashion, or left out.  But they are a way to help convey random thoughts and ideas which would clutter up the main rules text.
This game arose in a rather untoward fashion according to the conventional game design wisdom.  It began as the quintessential Fantasy Heartbreaker.  D&D is so awesome, except for this one thing!  And this other thing!  Be that as it may, I began to have ideas about game design that seemed to be slowly evolving past simple issues with D&D.  They also weren’t quite addressed to my satisfaction in any game system I have encountered, despite a good deal of looking around.
My main interest is to explore a strategic kingdom building background to a fantasy roleplaying game.  This has been done, of course, in games like Birthright, Pendragon, Reign, Houses of the Blooded, Song of Ice and Fire, Burning Empires, not to mention more recent supplements for games like 3E and Pathfinder (Kingmaker Campaign).
Although each of these games had elements I was interested in, none of them quite captured what I was hoping for.  Houses of the Blooded, a game I actually read later in the design process, is probably the closest to what I was looking for, since it embraces the strategic vision I was interested in.  But, there are a few unique elements I’m most interested in exploring under a single game system.  They are:
Troupe style play
Rather than each player restricting themselves to a single character, a group of characters is used, and different characters selected for the mission at hand.
One benefit to this approach is that players usually have a character which is appropriate to the type of scene they’re in.  No need to explain away taking a diplomat into a dungeon.
Another aspect of having the troupe style play is that heroes themselves become a resource.  If enough of them are injured or not able to function, then certain types of missions become very difficult.  This makes for interesting strategic choices.
The downside is that it can be difficult switching characters too often.  In practice, since there is a limited pool of characters, a player will generally rotate between only a few characters.
Well defined missions
Another key part of the design is the use of missions with very transparent rewards and consequences.
A high level of transparency makes it easier to strategize which activities most naturally align with the vision of the Stronghold.
Setting the stakes of the missions ahead of time also can help increase tension during the mission.
Finally, restricting missions to a set of pre-defined types makes it possible to focus play towards a very specific task.  Sometimes players can lose focus of their goal, possibly over-analyzing options.  Setting the nature of the mission beforehand makes this less likely, as the task is openly discussed by both the players and the GM.
In a kingdom building game, some sort of high level structure seems necessary so that the temporal pacing makes sense.  By having short constrained missions, which are tied to a season of time, the campaign is able to progress at a reasonable rate, without getting bogged down in too much minutiae.
The missions themselves are also constrained in terms of how different scenes fit together.  This is done for pacing reasons, so that a particular mission fits into a reasonable length of time.  It also allows for different mechanical elements (like mini-games) to fit into a session of play.
A marriage of mechanics and setting
I think it makes for better play if mechanics are adapted as closely as possible to the setting.  There are certainly generic mechanics that are highly useful, as evidenced by the use of Fate in this game, but certain mechanics bring about different play styles and need to be adapted to the target genre.  While generic toolkits are sometimes fun, it’s usually not trivial getting them to fit into a setting.  I wanted to do as much of that heavy lifting as possible.
As such, a fantasy kingdom building game is probably best built from the ground up as a cohesive whole.  I’m fairly skeptical of rule sets which attempt to tack on the mechanics of kingdom building to a framework which was never designed to support maintaining a kingdom.  In such a game, the kingdom becomes simply a possession that a character has, rather than the focus of the game. 
I think this should be extended to the setting.  There are plenty of fantasy RPGs out there which throw all the standard tropes into a box and let the GM and players sort it out.  That’s all well and good, but I’m more interested in giving the GM a world which is partially fleshed out, since it becomes much easier to control how the setting and the mechanics interact.  Very frequently rules have implicit settings (such as D&D) – but it’s probably better to make the setting explicit to clarify exactly what sort of game works with the rules.
Finally, having a better defined setting makes it easier for GMs to construct missions quickly.  Part of my goal with this game is to lower preparation time, without sacrificing interesting tactical options.  This is possible only be essentially building the rules around a specific setting.  While this is certainly not a simple game, it also isn’t a high prep game.
These three principles have guided the design process.  Certainly games exist which embrace some of these design goals.  The three that are closest are probably: Houses of the Blooded, which does a great job of putting the kingdom at the forefront, with just the right amount of fiddliness, Diaspora, which explores the idea of using mini-games as tactically rich resolution systems, as well as being a FATE game, and finally Burning Empires, which uses scene currency very effectively.  I’m sure those excellent games have influenced what I’ve tried to do with WotA.
Editorial note: Specific skills, stunts, mission types, mini-games, and resources are all capitalized.  Every other game specific term is left lower case.  All game specific terms are bolded the first time they are used.  Chapter and section titles are capitalized and italicized when they are used.