<chapter>Tips and Tricks</chapter>
<h1>Difficulty</h1>
The standard campaign is fairly easy for the Stronghold to win. The uncertainty at the core of <book>Wrath of the Autarch</book> is less “Will the Stronghold win?” and more “At what cost?”
However, some play groups may want a very real chance of losing. In this case, the following changes will increase the difficulty by varying amounts.
<list>
Hard - Increase the difficulty of all threats by one. In order to balance this change, add one to the defensive value of all defensive developments. Thus, defensive developments may stop threats of difficulty 5/6/7 instead of 4/5/6.
Crushing - As Hard, and also check for regional and faction threats twice each season.
Tragedy Theater - As Crushing, and also increase the difficulty for all missions against the Empire by one. Thus, all difficulties for The Empire start the campaign at 5 and increase from there. The mission to assassinate the Autarch is a difficulty 9, etc. Furthermore, the Empire starts with 10 additional archers and 10 additional infantry. Good luck!
</list>
<h1>Playing with a Gamemaster</h1>
It is fairly easy to steal concepts from this game and adapt them to standard <book>Fate Core</book> or even another role-playing game system. The easiest way to incorporate these rules while playing with a gamemaster is to ignore the challenge phase and the formal mission structure.
The Stronghold may be kept as is. The trading with factions and creation of developments may also be kept if they sound fun. However, instead of building developments at the beginning of each session, that activity can be left up to the discretion of the gamemaster. In order to keep the sense of time passing, it should probably occur every few sessions of play.
Rewards, such as artifacts, gaining new regions, gaining or losing disposition with a faction, or changes in stability, may also be left up to the discretion of the gamemaster. However, as in the case of building developments, the world should change fairly frequently, so applying changes to the Stronghold should occur at least every few sessions. The mission descriptions may be used as inspiration or taken largely as is to provide opposition during scenes.
The conflict rules may be sprinkled in to add variety or when more structure is called for. Reserving these for use during particularly climactic moments in the campaign is a good policy. Since a number of developments improve the ability of characters to succeed during conflicts, it is a good idea to keep them around.
<h1>Crafting Threats</h1>
Although a number of threats are provided in the <chapref>Threats and Schemes</chapref> chapter, it is helpful for the Autarch player to know how to create their own. Crafting threats, like most of <book>Wrath of the Autarch</book>, should be viewed as a collaborative process.
<h2>Rough Sketch</h2>
The type of conflict and difficulty goes a long way to determining what sort of threat will occur. If at the end of a session, a threat is indicated, the group should work to quickly sketch out what might be happening. This may be nothing more than looking through the <chapref>Threats</chapref> chapter and finding a suitable example. Alternatively, a new threat may be constructed from scratch.
This shouldn’t be a detailed explanation. A simple phrase is sufficient. For example, “peasants are uprising at Echo Lake”, “border disagreement with Crescent Hold”, “skeletons are attacking allies in Lily Manor”. Use the Chronicle of Seasons to help spur creativity. What happened in the past with the faction or in the region? Was there ever backlash? How is stability for the Stronghold?
Furthermore, if a threat was ignored, it is fine to bring it back again. Those bandits that were never dealt with may be back again!
<h2>Opposition</h2>
If the Stronghold players have no intention to deal with a threat, leave it as a rough sketch. It should be noted on the Chronicle of Seasons to jog the memory of the group later. If, however, the Stronghold players intend to deal with the threat next season, opposition will need to be created.
Sometimes creating opposition is not needed at all. If the mission involves diplomacy with another faction, for example, the opposition will be leaders chosen from the faction.
If new opposition is needed, they can be based on opposition listed in existing threats. This may require scaling the peak skill slightly (raising or lowering the rank of all skills so the peak skill matches the mission difficulty).
As a last resort, opposition will need to be created. Each of the conflict chapters provides guidelines for creating opposition. Frequently, the sample opposition from each chapter is sufficient. The main exception tends to be unique monsters desired for skirmish threats. For these sorts of beasts, look to the general opposition stunts when creating them.
<h1>Designer’s Notes</h1>
This game arose in a rather untoward fashion according to the conventional game design wisdom. It began as the quintessential Fantasy Heartbreaker. DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS is so awesome, except for this one thing! And this other thing! Be that as it may, I began to have ideas about game design that seemed to be slowly evolving past simple issues with DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS. They also weren’t quite addressed to my satisfaction in any game system I have encountered, despite a good deal of looking around.
My main interest is to explore a strategic kingdom building background to a fantasy roleplaying game. This has been done, of course, in games like Birthright, Pendragon, Reign, Houses of the Blooded, Song of Ice and Fire, Burning Empires, not to mention more recent supplements for games like 3E and Pathfinder (Kingmaker Campaign).
Although each of these games had elements I was interested in, none of them quite captured what I was hoping for. Houses of the Blooded, a game I actually read later in the design process, is probably the closest to what I was looking for, since it embraces the strategic vision I was interested in. But, there are a few unique elements I’m most interested in exploring under a single game system. They are:
<h2> Troupe Style Play</h2>
Rather than each player restricting themselves to a single character, a group of characters is used, and different characters selected for the mission at hand.
One benefit to this approach is that players usually have a character which is appropriate to the type of scene they’re in. No need to explain away taking a diplomat into a dungeon.
Another aspect of having the troupe style play is that heroes themselves become a resource. If enough of them are injured or not able to function, then certain types of missions become very difficult. This makes for interesting strategic choices.
The downside is that it can be difficult switching characters too often. In practice, since there is a limited pool of characters, a player will generally rotate between only a few characters.
<h2> Defined Missions</h2>
Another key part of the design is the use of missions with very transparent rewards and consequences. A high level of transparency makes it easier to strategize which activities most naturally align with the vision of the Stronghold. Setting the stakes of the missions ahead of time also can help increase tension during the mission.
Finally, restricting missions to a set of pre-defined types makes it possible to focus play towards a very specific task. Sometimes players can lose focus of their goal, possibly over-analyzing options. Setting the nature of the mission beforehand makes this less likely, as the task is openly discussed by both the players and the GM.
In a kingdom building game, some sort of high level structure seems necessary so that the temporal pacing makes sense. By having short constrained missions, which are tied to a season of time, the campaign is able to progress at a reasonable rate, without getting bogged down in too much minutiae.
The missions themselves are also constrained in terms of how different scenes fit together. This is done for pacing reasons, so that a particular mission fits into a reasonable length of time. It also allows for different mechanical elements (like mini-games) to fit into a session of play.
<h2> Integrated Setting</h2>
I think it makes for better play if mechanics are adapted as closely as possible to the setting. There are certainly generic mechanics that are highly useful, as evidenced by the use of 
Fate in this game, but certain mechanics bring about different play styles and need to be adapted to the target genre. While generic toolkits are sometimes fun, it’s usually not trivial getting them to fit into a setting. I wanted to do as much of that heavy lifting as possible.
As such, a fantasy kingdom building game is probably best built from the ground up as a cohesive whole. I’m fairly skeptical of rule sets which attempt to tack on the mechanics of kingdom building to a framework which was never designed to support maintaining a kingdom. In such a game, the kingdom becomes simply a possession that a character has, rather than the focus of the game.
I think this should be extended to the setting. There are plenty of fantasy RPGs out there which throw all the standard tropes into a box and let the GM and players sort it out. That’s all well and good, but I’m more interested in giving the GM a world which is partially fleshed out, since it becomes much easier to control how the setting and the mechanics interact. Very frequently rules have implicit settings (such as DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS) – but it’s probably better to make the setting explicit to clarify exactly what sort of game works with the rules.
Finally, having a better defined setting makes it easier for GMs to construct missions quickly. Part of my goal with this game is to lower preparation time, without sacrificing interesting tactical options. This is possible only be essentially building the rules around a specific setting. While this is certainly not a simple game, it also isn’t a high prep game. These three principles have guided the design process. Certainly games exist which embrace some of these design goals. The three that are closest are probably: Houses of the Blooded, which does a great job of putting the kingdom at the forefront, with just the right amount of fiddliness, Diaspora, which explores the idea of using mini-games as tactically rich resolution systems, as well as being a Fate game, and finally Burning Empires, which uses scene currency very effectively. I’m sure those excellent games have influenced what I’ve tried to do with WotA. Editorial note: Specific skills, stunts, mission types, mini-games, and resources are all capitalized. Every other game specific term is left lower case. All game specific terms are bolded the first time they are used. Chapter and section titles are capitalized and italicized when they are used.
<h2> On Compels</h2>
I'm a big fan of giving players other ways to earn fate points beyond compels. Even good Fate GMs don’t always do a good job of keeping Fate points flowing, so I’ve employed a number of player facing methods to do this. The terminology for “enduring” an aspect comes from Chronica Fuedalis, which is also a Fate inspired medieval game.
This concept of a mechanical system from hindering aspects is also a big part of Cortex+, which lets the player gain Fate-like currency by using skills in a potentially negative way. It’s also nice in a game that has more tactical elements to have an easier mechanical way to get Fate points.
The other big differences are minor advantages (which go away after a turn) and the stress limit on the Attack action. Both of these were put in place to handle the more tactical Infiltration and Skirmish mini-games. Create Advantage creates an action inequality that is compounded if players can sit back and create advantages instead of engaging. Furthermore, having too much stress come out of one attack can make one vs. many battles fairly boring.
